DON'T TOUCH THAT DATA

Tom Chadwin
QGIS Scotland User Group
7 November 2018
The Engine Shed, Stirling



INTRO

1. Me, NNPA, qgis2web, not here to talk about that

2. * Live in the middle of nowhere (Zoomstack)

3. * Greenhaugh First School

4. Closure

5. How could I help? Maps: increased travel to school; petitions


TRAVEL TO SCHOOL

6. * Ross at FOSS4GUK 2018 - origin-destination lines, raised into third 
   dimension, as it connotes a journey, and reduces cognitive load in 
   interpreting the map

7. Do what he did but in QGIS

8. Data is postcodes of pupil addresses (point geometry)

9. * Origin-destination maps are lines, not points (ECOLOGICAL ATLAS OF THE 
   BERING, CHUKCHI, AND BEAUFORT SEAS, Daniel P Huffman)

10. Could create a new layer, and generate lines between these points and the 
    location of the school

11. Separate data from style (web design) - if data changes, don't have to 
    rerun all sorts of processes each time
   
12. * How? Geometry generators (line with in situ gradient profile, by Régis 
    Haubourg)

13. * Draw line between the origin and destination using an expression

14. * * Curve it (thanks to Ross and Nathan Saylor for techniques/code)

15. * Add shadow

16. * Blur shadow

17. * Label and caption (not v successful)

THIS IS STILL A POINT DATASET, so the could be applied to a different point 
dataset, and it would work


PETITION

18. * * * * Weakness for isometrics (even made a game myself years ago)

19. * Had seen amazing Craig Taylor map - higher round one point, emphasis

20. * Thought 2.5D renderer might work (Nicholas Duggan)

21. 2.5D renderer only works with polygons, not points

22. Found plugin to convert points to squares

23. * Python

24. * Rotated by 30deg for isometric

25. * But don't want to transform the geometry (separate data from style), so 
    convert to a geometry generator using a QGIS expression, not Python

26. * Looks good, and is a polygon, but because still only converted to one by 
    the style, not the geometry itself, 2.5D renderer remains unavailable, and 
    we have to recreate it all ourselves with geometry generators (which is 
    precisely what the QGIS 2.5D renderer does itself, and a big part of why 
    they were implemented in QGIS)

27. * Raise the roof using translate()

28. * Combined with point-to-square code, we get this (note layer var for size)

29. This makes all the features the same height (1000), which makes Z axis 
    pointless. Cannot cluster (too small dataset, plus possible projection 
    issue)

30. * Instead, stress that petition signatures are more important the closer 
    they are to the school, so use distance from school for height
    
31. * But that means further away = higher, so invert (because this could lead 
    to vastly tall features, use logarithmic scale)
    
32. * Walls next - here's the QGIS 2.5d code

33. * Add in our inverted distance for height

34. * We now have isometric blocks

35. But there is no wall shading, so appear totally flat

36. * Back to the QGIS 2.5d renderer wall colour data-defined override

37. * Shaded walls, but one of the back walls is showing through

38. * Solution: instead of extruding the whole square, extrude only the front 
    edges
    
39. * Blocks complete!

40. Craig Taylor said add "long" shadows

41. * QGIS 2.5d renderer ones aren't great (not long, just of original feature)

42. You know what this needs? A geometry generator.

43. * Adapt the walls generator but at a different angle

44. * After some problems with blending modes failing owing to an upstream Qt 
    bug, and the shadows needing to be anchored using symbol levels, it's done
    
45. * Changed projection to look more 2.5d, labelled catchment polygons in 
    perspective, added overlay gradient in layout, bokeh via GIMP - finished 
    ("Worst game of Risk ever!")
    
THIS IS STILL A POINT DATASET, so as more signatures were added to the CSV, it 
all updated without further intervention


EPILOGUE

46. It worked: closure abandoned, related MAT proposal withdrawn, BMS closure 
    overturned by Office of the Schools Adjudicator, but much still remains

47. QGIS played its part, but to leap into generalization, with specific 
    relevance as the US midterms are now being counted, everyone used their 
    skills to fight a catastrophic unilateral proposal by local government. To 
    quote Jed Bartlet:
    
48. * Decision are made by those who turn up


PS Find more details on Medium